JUDY WOODRUFF: And speaking
of the efforts to replace the
Affordable Care Act, let's
continue hearing how
some citizens and health
care providers see it.
Producer Jason Kane visited
a pair of clinics in the
heart of coal country.
Last night, we took you to the
town of Wise, Virginia, in a
state that opted not to expand
Medicaid for
low-income residents.
Just across the border, in West
Virginia, the Affordable Care
Act and its Medicaid expansion
meant the rate of uninsured
residents dropped from at least
21 percent before the law took
effect to 9 percent in 2015,
and nearly a third of families
in the state do get Medicaid.
More than 83 percent of
Mingo County voted for the
president in the election.
And the state has been ravaged
by the opioids epidemic.
But at the Williamson Health
and Wellness Center, nerves
are now on edge as patients
recount their personal stories.
REBECCA HICKS, West Virginia:
My name's Rebecca Hicks, and I'm
from Chattaroy, West Virginia.
I'm 37 years old.
When I was younger, I was raped.
I guess I got on drugs to cope
with it, regular pain pills.
First, it started with, you
know, snorting the pills.
Then it led to
shooting the pills.
And I have always
struggled to have a doctor.
And this place kind of
takes care of all of it.
My access to Medicaid has helped
me pay for medicines that I
would never have been able
to pay for and to see
specialists that I wouldn't
be able to see if I
didn't have that medical
care.
JEROME CLINE, Family
Nurse Practitioner: My
name's Jerome Cline.
I'm a family nurse practitioner.
With the passage of the
Affordable Care Act, the state
had expanded Medicaid programs.
Right now, it's just under
50 percent of our patients,
I think, are Medicaid.
VICKI HATFIELD, Family
Nurse Practitioner: My
name is Vicki Hatfield.
I'm a certified family
nurse practitioner and a
certified diabetes educator.
Once we started seeing more
patients qualify for Medicaid,
they were able to come in, and
we were able to start getting
them caught up on their
preventive screenings and health
promotion activities, and
just be able to treat their
chronic illnesses that had been
neglected.
The increased funds for Medicaid
services brought more revenue
into the clinic, so that
allowed us to hire
more people here.
It also allowed us to do some
other things in the community
to promote healthy living.
JEROME CLINE: We have a
farmers market every Saturday.
VICKI HATFIELD: We also had
community gardens start.
And we see more people
growing their own vegetables.
JEROME CLINE: We have a
community 5K almost every month.
And then we have a community
health worker program.
It's certainly a lot of cheaper
to keep people healthy at home
than it is once they get into
the system.
VICKI HATFIELD: Now, as we watch
what's happening with possible
repeal or replacement of the
Affordable Care Act,
it's very concerning.
I know patients are concerned,
particularly patients who
had chronic diseases that now
they're able to get
medications for, or patients
who need annual screening.
CONNIE SUE MAHON, West Virginia:
I have got a head injury.
I have got a sleeping disorder.
I have got back problems.
I have got knee problems.
I have panic attacks.
My name is Connie Sue Mahon.
We need the medical.
And if they take it, it's
going to hurt a lot of
families in West Virginia.
President Trump promised
us a better plan.
And we all voted to get him
in there because we thought
he'd do this country better.
But if we ain't got that
medical, we won't have nothing.
And that's how people
in Mingo County live.
JERINEL TAYLOR, West Virginia:
My name is Jerinel Taylor.
I'm 58 years old.
I have diabetes.
You have to have the medication
to keep the diabetes down.
If you don't, you lose your
eyes, your kidneys, and all this
stuff, so I try to keep up with
it.
I started receiving the Medicaid
after the Obamacare, the
Affordable Care Act, or whatever
it was called.
With the care I receive here,
my numbers have come down, my
blood pressure, and they keep
everything pretty much took
care of for me, the mammograms
and all the cancer screenings
that I need.
Affordable Care Act has helped
me, but it has hurt other
people, especially people like
my brother.
It's hurt him.
And he works hard.
And then they take it out
of his taxes because he
doesn't have insurance.
He can't afford the insurance
under the Affordable Care Act.
So, it has hurt him.
So, if they drop
me, they drop me.
JEROME CLINE: Thinking about
the possible changes to the
health care system and the
drive to save money
with Medicaid, I'm
not sure if there's an
accounting of these people
now seeking their primary care
through the E.R.s, when they
can come here and the visit,
and pay a small co-pay, vs.
going to the E.R., and all of
a sudden, it's a $2,000 bill.
REBECCA HICKS: About
two years ago, I had
been in the hospital,
like in the mental ward
for my mental health
at least 25 times.
And now I have hadn't
had to be hospitalized
for over two years,
because of all the doctors
here that has helped me so much.
JEROME CLINE: Especially now,
with the drug epidemic around
here, what are we going to
do with the people who
have found an improved
quality of life, and
they have moved beyond,
you know, a life of
addiction, and we have
got them into recovery?
If we curtail that
treatment, what potentially
happens to those patients?
VICKI HATFIELD: I would
like to see the Medicaid
expansion continue.
I would like to see
also a revision for
some of the premiums.
I have some patients who did not
qualify for Medicaid expansion,
but they also could not
afford the premium
and the deductible.
I think that needs
to be revisited.
I think there are good parts
to the program, but there are
also some things that do need
improvement.
REBECCA HICKS: I would tell
the politicians that they might
want to think real hard about
it and take a break from it a
little bit until they know more
about it, because what they're
dealing is, if they take
health care away from somebody
that's an addict, they're going
to resort to worser things.
I chose those people.
I put my faith in those people
that they would make this
place better, not take away the
only things that were
helping this area.